---
cssclasses: [osb-intro]
book: "Judith"
source: "OSB"
up: "[[Judith]]"
---

IOUDITH TO THE READER

E DITION OF THE G REEK T EXT

The NETS translation of the book of Ioudith is based on the edition of R. Hanhart ( Septuaginta: Vetus Testamentum Graecum Auctoritate Academiae Scientiarum Gottingensis editum VIII.4: Iudith [Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1979]). While I have followed Hanhart’s critical text for the most part, there are a few instances in which, to my mind, the Greek manuscript evidence commends an alternative reading as representing the earliest form of the Greek text. These departures from Hanhart are duly noted as they arise. In three places (3.8; 4.9; and 6.6), I am convinced that a copying error must have crept into the text early in its history and that consequently the original reading has been obscured; in these passages, emendation was called for without the support of a Greek manuscript. In each case the reading I have followed does enjoy attestation by the Syriac text, which itself represents an early translation of the Greek.

P LACE OF I OUDITH W ITHIN NETS

Although the book of Ioudith is demonstrably the translation of a Semitic work, most likely Hebrew, its parent text vanished sometime in late antiquity. Consequently, the present translation cannot serve the synoptic purpose of NETS with the NRSV. I have nevertheless endeavored to provide a translation which is faithful to the principles and aims of NETS.

T RANSLATION P ROFILE OF THE G REEK

General Character

One of the aims of the NETS translator is to capture in English the constitutive character of the Septuagintal text. For much of the corpus, this means that the translator must squarely address the fact that the book he or she is rendering is itself a translation. In this respect, the book of Ioudith is no exception. From its language one can infer with some measure of confidence not only that the text represents the translation of a Hebrew parent, but that it represents a certain kind of translation, namely, one which has rendered its parent in a relatively metaphrastic fashion; this is to say that within the constraints of grammaticality, the Greek of the translation shows every indication of an isomorphic and quantitative fidelity to the language of its source. Implicit in the verbal texture of any translation is its relationship with another text in another language. In an interlinear translation, this relationship is characterized by a high degree of dependence: the Greek of Ioudith reads as it does in large measure because the Hebrew of its parent read as it did. The image NETS has adopted to capture this profile is that of interlinearity, the picture of one text following another, word-for-word, line-by-line. What this image conveys is the relative transparency of the Greek translation to the Semitic discourse it renders.

Semantics

Although upon reading Ioudith one is struck by the peculiar way in which familiar Greek words are used by the translator, it must nevertheless be stressed that idiosyncratic usage is the exception rather than the norm. Yet unconventional usage in Ioudith needs an explanation. In an interlinear translation the frame of reference within which a given word is deployed has been defined almost entirely by the task of translation itself, i.e., the need to provide lexical equivalents. A given word was chosen by the translator precisely because it was deemed an appropriate rendering of the corresponding word in the parent text. Its coherence with the larger verbal context of the target language was not a primary consideration, and so it is that we find Greek words which, at first blush, behave more or less like Semitic ones. This does not mean that they have somehow taken on Semitic meanings; on the contrary, it is upon Greek linguistic convention that the translator erects his interlinear edifice. Conventional Greek meanings had to be presumed if the Greek text was to discharge its constitutive function vis-à-vis its parent, i.e., as an extended series of glosses.

Under the paradigm of interlinearity one can identify various approaches to the task of selecting suitable lexical equivalents. Thus, while certain translations within the Septuagintal corpus exhibit a tendency to stereotypical rendering, where one Greek word is assigned to a Semitic counterpart and then deployed consistently as its equivalent, others will show markedly less reliance on such one-to-one equations. As far as one can tell in the absence of its parent, the book of Ioudith can be characterized by its use of numerous Greek words to render a single Hebrew item, hence by semantic differentiation. Consequently, the book boasts a rich vocabulary. Such differentiation should not be seen to imply, however, that the translator’s usage is always felicitous. One senses at times that it is not the context that motivates his word choice so much as the principle of variety itself. Furthermore, he tends to negotiate the meaning of the parent text in an atomistic fashion, if not word-by-word then at least phrase-by-phrase. This follows directly from the premise of interlinearity. It gives rise to many isolate renderings, word choices which reflect the translator’s understanding of a corresponding Hebrew item but which have been made at the expense of conventional Greek usage. While the translator may thereby offer his reader considerable interpretive purchase on a small unit of the parent text, the price paid is often as not the overall coherence of the Greek prose.

Although I have noted semantic differentiation within the translation, further qualification is needed. For although the Greek translator employs a large vocabulary, he exhibits a tendency to use his words in accordance with the distribution of their Hebrew counterparts. Greek words are evidently assigned to items in the source language and then deployed according to this equivalency. Put simply, certain Greek words seem to tag along with the Hebrew words they render; this can be inferred from their distribution, which is often distinct from that found in Greek prose of this period. Not surprisingly, there is at times a certain tension between word and context. An example of this is provided by the Greek verb (“to make”), the core meaning of which pertains to the production of things external to some agent. This verb was evidently assigned to Hebrew (, which in very many cases denotes agency without a view to production. The result is that the translator repeatedly deploys in contexts which, while fully appropriate for the Hebrew item, would have undoubtedly occasioned the use of another verb in compositional Greek.

For certain items the translator relaxes his lexical bravado and chooses to convey the repetitive character of the parent text. While his usage may be consistent with contemporary Greek convention, the frequency with which a given word occurs will often arise directly from Hebrew literary style. So for example the translator’s use of the verb (“to go out”), which likely rendered Hebrew . It is a fitting equivalent, and the meaning of the Greek is never strained by its use. At the same time, the persistence with which this word occurs lends the translator’s prose an unmistakably Hebraic quality.

It is important to emphasize that on many occasions the translator’s choice of vocabulary is altogether apt. His penchant for variety even leads him to draw upon literary usage seldom found elsewhere in the translated corpus. At 14.9, for instance, rather than use (“cheerful”) to convey the cheerful response of the people to Ioudith’s account of her triumph, he supplies the much less common form (see Esth 9.19), which carries poetic associations altogether fitting to the heightened atmosphere of the scene.

The translator’s use of the Greek language, while constrained by his translation technique, remains the product of one whose first language was likely to have been Greek. Coming as it does from the hand of one at home in Hellenistic culture, Ioudith is often best understood against this background. A striking example of this is to be found in Ioudith’s song (16.6) where she makes reference to both the and the . While the translator no doubt had a warrant in the parent text for both of these mytho-poetic figures, the (see Gen 14.5) and the (see Gen 6.4) respectively, instead of providing transliterations of the Hebrew names he chose to introduce comparable figures from Greek mythology.

In sum, if we view the work of the translation in terms of the solution of problems posed by the source language, we can speak of the transmission of such solutions from one translator to another.

Syntax

The most obvious syntactical feature of Ioudith is parataxis. While popular Greek composition of this period tolerated parataxis to a fair degree, the prose of Ioudith often amounts to a seemingly endless march of clauses beginning with the conjunction (“and”) followed by the finite verb. While in Hebrew such parataxis reflects the canons of classical composition, the interlinear rendering of these sequences in Greek, on the other hand, is decidedly at variance with the style of any period.

The jarring use of prepositions is also worthy of comment. Again, it is less a question of grammaticality than of convention. A preposition will at times be supplied which, while adequate to the translator’s purpose of representing the structure of the parent text, sits somewhat uneasily within its Greek context.

In certain instances, it is not the construction itself but its sheer frequency that bespeaks its Semitic origin. One favorite usage of the translator is the so-called telic . A legitimate construction in Greek, it involves the construal of the preposition with a nominal item so as to carry the sense of purpose or reference. In the book of Ioudith it was evidently used in certain instances to render Hebrew constructions with .

While he is not altogether rigid in his use of translation equivalencies, the translator of Ioudith is fairly consistent in his handling of the syntactical problems posed by the source language. This means that while, on the one hand, a limited range of Greek constructions appears with a certain regularity, others are conspicuous by their absence, as e.g., the genitive absolute. Participles are seldom construed as adverbials (i.e., circumstantials) but most often as adjectivals; conversely, infinitives tend not to be used as out and out substantives. In both cases, therefore, the Greek mimics the Hebrew. By and large, the translator makes minimal use of the resources available in Greek for subordination. The end result of such a selective use of the Greek syntactical repertoire is that the language of the translation reflects a profoundly Hebraic prose style: terse, direct, measured, stately.

Idiom

A particularly telling characteristic of Ioudith is its literal rendering of Hebrew idiomatic expressions. Most prevalent are those which trade on a figurative use of the word “face.” Hebrew occurs in a number of thoroughly conventional prepositional constructions, e.g., and , marking relative spatial position. Here the lexeme is semantically bleached, as it were, its function predominantly structural. In Greek, however, spatial position is not typically marked by expressions which involve the face (although it can be). Hence, the translator’s tendency to render by results in a proliferation of phrases that, while adequately conveying the prepositional force of their Hebrew counterparts, nevertheless carry some of the semantic content of the word “face” into the context. This lends the Greek prose a certain naiveté. The important point is that this quality does not arise from stylistic motivation; it is a function of interlinearity.

Fixed phrases abounded in the parent text of Ioudith, and their literal rendering contributes to the Hebraic tone of the translation. Two notable expressions not current in standard Greek are (“all flesh” 2.3) and (“speak peace” 15 .8). In the Hebrew, the corresponding expressions would have carried the sense “all people” and “to wish well” respectively. But occurring as they do in a Greek text, where they are by no means idiomatic, they cannot be so glossed. Other stock Hebrew phrases transferred to the Greek include: (2.17) “which were without number”; (3.10) “a month of days”; and (8.32) “to generations of generations.”

At various points in the narrative, characters profess an oath using some variant on the formula [present indicative verb of the third person] (e.g., 2.12; 11.7; 12.4; 13.16), which, taking a certain amount of liberty with both the Greek and English, might be glossed, “as surely as [x] doth live, so surely will I perform [y].” The idiom is decidedly Hebraic, and, again, a special case of interlinearity.

T HE NETS T RANSLATION OF I OUDITH

For its Greco-Jewish readership, Ioudith would thus have seemed at once strange and familiar. Strange because it flew in the face of Greek convention, both popular and literary, yet familiar owing to the fact that it took its place within a growing body of Greco-Jewish translation-literature. The challenge for the NETS translator is then both to convey the strangeness and the familiarity of the text, its beauty as well as its clumsiness. To this end, I have distinguished between source-oriented and target-oriented features of the Greek. Quite simply, a target-oriented feature is one consistent with the conventions of Greek prose; a source-oriented feature is one arising from the premise of interlinearity. On the whole I have rendered target-oriented features in idiomatic English, while allowing the source-oriented features of the prose to stand in tension, as indeed they do in the Greek. In this way I endeavor to convey the Semitic feel of the prose, while at the same time capturing its peculiar brand of literary complexity. My approach, however, remains informal; no hard and fast rules are possible here.

Many source-oriented features of the prose of Ioudith are not easily captured in English. In the case of inter-sentential relations, however, it is often possible to achieve the same effect in English fortuitously present in the Greek. And so I have throughout preserved its parataxis, attributable to the method and aims of the translator. Although parataxis is not entirely foreign to Greek prose style, by reproducing it in English I hope to convey the constitutive character of the translation.

It is axiomatic for NETS that translations are produced for a purpose and that the purpose of a translation will be reflected in its text-linguistic make-up. In the case of Ioudith, almost every verse bespeaks the mandate of the translator to provide his community with an interlinear text. What we might call the literary style of Ioudith is thus to be accounted for on this premise. At the same time, the translator’s prose, while not by any stretch of the imagination adhering to contemporary Greek poetics, does carry a certain charm and resonance of its own. The repetition of certain verbal patterns is obviously a reflex from the Hebrew. Yet it is no less effective a literary feature for all that, investing the text with various sorts of verbal complexity. So too, there are times when the language of Ioudith echoes that of earlier Greco-Jewish translations. The fact that such intertextuality is often a reflex of shared translation technique does not diminish the added dimension of significance it has to offer the reader.

B IBLIOGRAPHICAL N OTE

Not unlike the Greco-Jewish translator of Ioudith, I have self-consciously undertaken my one word translation within the context of a literary tradition. For English letters, the Authorized Version is a wellspring from which one is well advised to drink deeply. I made a point of returning to its translation of Ioudith, not so much as a guide to the problems of translation, but rather as a literary departure point. After all, the language of the AV has certain features that invite comparison with the Greek of the Septuagint, not least of all its approximation of Hebrew prose style. Of the relevant secondary literature, I found the textual notes and commentary of Morton S. Enslin and Solomon Zeitlin’s The Book of Judith (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1972) most useful. All English-speaking scholarship on Ioudith is in some manner indebted to A. E. Cowley’s “The Book of Judith” (in Charles 1:242–267), and in that respect I am no exception.

My greatest debt is that owed to my academic advisor, friend, and mentor, Albert Pietersma. To read a text with any measure of competence is to have served an apprenticeship of sorts, and here I was trained by one of the most able readers of the Septuagint today, whose considerable learning and astute insight have informed my work from start to finish.
