---
cssclasses: [osb-intro]
book: "Song of Songs"
source: "OSB"
up: "[[Song of Songs]]"
---

ECCLESIAST TO THE READER

E DITION OF THE G REEK T EXT

The NETS translation is based on the edition of Alfred Rahlfs ( Septuaginta. Id est Vetus Testamentum graece iuxta LXX interpretes, 2 vols . [Stuttgart: Württembergische Bibelanstalt, 1935]), since at present no fully critical text is available, though one is in progress.

In one case I have deviated from Rahlfs’ edition. In 1.17 Rahlfs has (“comparisons,” “analogies,” or “parables”), a reading supported by all Greek manuscripts (La = errores = ά, cf. Vulg.). This is contrary, however, to the translation technique of the Greek translator. The Hebrew word being translated in 1.17 is (“madness”). This is rendered by in 2.12 and 7.25 and also by , a cognate noun, in 9.3. Similarly, (“madness”) is rendered by in 10.13 and (“mad”) by in 2.2. Conversely, the Greek translator uses for the only occurrence of (“comparison,” “proverb”) in 12.9. Therefore, the original text at 1.17 was probably for which represents an error of hearing and sight occurring so early that it dominated the textual tradition that has come down to us. Earlier proposals are (Grabe) and (R. Gordis, “Ecclesiastes 1.17—Its Text and Interpretation,” JBL 56 (1937) 323–330 = q / 248mg).

T ITLE OF THE B OOK

The title for this book in NETS requires some explanation. In the English versions it is called “Ecclesiastes,” a title adopted from the Latin Vulgate and derived originally from the Greek . The title in Hebrew reads “The Words of Qoheleth, the son of David, king in Jerusalem,” or just “Qoheleth” (Eccl 1.1). “Qoheleth” occurs only seven times in the book and nowhere else in the canonical Hebrew writings. It may be construed as a feminine singular active participle of the verb , which has the basic meaning of “assembling.” Analogous forms are found in the list of the “Servants of Solomon” in Ezra and Nehemiah to designate public officials. For example, “Hassophereth” in Ezra 2.55 and Nehemiah 7.57 may mean “Official Scribe,” and “Pokereth-Hazzebaim” in Ezra 2.55 and Nehemiah 7.59 may mean “Gazelle-Warden.” If this analysis is correct, Qoheleth could perhaps designate the “Officer of the Qahal” or “Master of Ceremonies of the Assembly,” a role similar to the Speaker of the House of Representatives. The Greek translator related this term to the noun , “assembly” and translated rather than transliterated the word by an agent noun in Greek which means “one who participates in a popular assembly.” Jerome interpreted this in Latin by the use of the term concionator , or “speaker before an assembly,” a meaning unattested in Greek prior to the Greek translation. It was from this meaning that the English concept of “Preacher” was derived. The English equivalent used here is Ecclesiast. Since the term is known in English, it is spelled here accordingly, though its intended meaning is “member of an assembly.”

T RANSLATION P ROFILE OF THE G REEK

The Greek translation of Ecclesiast is characterised by extreme formal equivalence, so much so that scholars have suggested that it is the work of Aquila himself, a revisor of the Septuagint who flourished c. 120 CE. 1 While the identity of the translator is still uncertain and undetermined according to the most recent research, the character of the translation reveals that in fact some patterns are identical to those considered classical Aquila, while others are clearly not Aquila.

The approach of the translator to his task is one where faithfulness is defined and measured by the degree of quantitative alignment between Greek translation and Hebrew original. As a result, the text is difficult to read in places and almost incomprehensible at times from the point of view of the native speaker of Hellenistic Greek who had no knowledge of or recourse to the source text. The attempt of the translator to align his translation with the source language and text affects both lexical and syntactic choices in Greek. Choosing the same lexeme in Greek for every occurrence of a particular lexeme in the Hebrew regardless of the contextual meaning results in a high degree of stereotyping. Few calques or isolate renderings, however, are to be found. Like Aquila, then, consistency and uniformity in Hebrew-Greek equivalents is extremely rigid. Unlike Aquila, however, we do not see a set of Hebrew-Greek equivalents that is so highly refined and specialized that distinct equivalents are employed for each Hebrew lexeme, nor does the translator attempt to represent the root system of Hebrew by forming a set of equivalents from a single Greek stem to be used for nouns and verbs derived from a single root. Even more than in lexical equivalents, it is in the morpho-syntactic structures that the attempt to align the Greek and the Hebrew is most apparent and also where the results are so awkward or even absurd. One obvious and outstanding example is the rendering of by (1.14; 2.12, 17, 18; 3.10, 11 bis , 17 bis ; 4.1, 2, 3, 4 bis , 15; 5.3, 6; 7.14, 15, 18, 26, 29; 8.8, 9, 15, 17 bis ; 9.1 bis , 15; 10.19, 20; 11.5, 7; 12.9, 14). 2 That is found with the dative in 9.11 is normal that it is found, however, with the genitive (9.15) or accusative (rel.) to mark the direct object is contrary to Greek grammar. This characteristic may be further illustrated. In 2.1 is rendered by . The verb followed by here is idiomatic, conveying the sense “to enjoy” (so NRSV). The Greek translator rigidly renders by and . Contextually, “to see in good” makes no sense in Greek. Again, a construction article + + noun normally contrasts the whole with the part. 3 Yet in 3.17 is rendered (cf. 3.1; 4.8, 16). The article is employed to represent the this effect creates difficulties for the Greek reader and skews the meaning of the Hebrew while attempting to represent it formally in all respects. Other cases are perhaps readable, but awkwardly so. Note, for example, that in 12.1 is rendered by . With the negative , the result is awkward but not necessarily impossible Greek. Elsewhere the rigid approach of the translator is carried off more cleverly. Hebrew (1.17; 2.1, 7, 8, 14, 15 bis , 19, 21, 23, 23, 24, 26; 3.11; 4.4, 8 tris , 11, 14, 16 bis , 16; 5.9, 16, 18; 6.5, 9; 7.14, 21, 22 bis ; 8.10, 12, 14, 16; 9.1 bis , 6 bis , 12, 13; 10.20; 12.5) or is (1.11; 3.13; 5.15; 6.3, 7; 7.6, 18; 8.17; 9.3, 11 tris ; 10.3; 11.2) is always rendered by except in a double translation in 7.22b where the equivalent is simply . Nonetheless, the equivalence , while illustrating the spirit of the Greek translator, is unlikely to have originated with him. Here the translator extends and perpetuates a tradition. Clearly, then, the Greek translator of Ecclesiast belongs to the so-called tradition of translators.

T HE NETS T RANSLATION

An attempt has been made to capture and represent in the NETS translation something of the approach, characteristics, and spirit of the Greek translation. Naturally, English that is ungrammatical is avoided. Formal equivalence, however, is frequently given higher priority than idiomatic English.

In some cases, formal equivalence in the Greek vis-à-vis the Hebrew is possible or has been reproduced where the English would be ungrammatical. The representation of by , for example, must be ignored in NETS. Another example is the frequent use of the independent pronoun in the Hebrew where the verb is already marked for first person, carefully reproduced by in the Greek translation (1.12, 6 bis ; 2.1, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 tris , 18 bis , 20, 24; 3.17, 18; 4.1, 2, 4, 7, 8; 5.17; 7.25, 26; 8.12, 15; 9.16). This has only been represented in NETS in 1.12. In cases like 2.1, discussed earlier, no attempt is made to represent rigidly the preposition in Greek with its formal equivalent in the English language, even though that is what the Greek translator has done in order to represent the Hebrew exactly.

The attempt to follow a model of translation similar to that of the Greek translator has occasionally created clashes with the NRSV. For example, in 5.9 NRSV has a dynamic and idiomatic rendering of the Hebrew: “But all things considered, this is an advantage for a land: a king for a plowed field.” The Greek renders the same Hebrew in extreme literalism. The differences between NETS and NRSV are due partly to the fact that the Greek translation interprets the Hebrew differently but are also due partly to the fact that the literalism is reproduced in NETS.

Aligning NETS with NRSV has been difficult not only where NRSV is more dynamic than the Greek in rendering the same text. On occasion the gender inclusive language policy of NRSV must be abandoned in order to represent the Greek faithfully. For example, according to the approach of the Greek translator, all 49 instances of are rendered by and all 10 instances of are rendered by . This translation technique enables the Greek reader to track the differences between and in the parent text. In NETS, while gender inclusive renderings may be maintained for must be rendered by “man” in English, even when functions as an indefinite pronoun, in order to represent properly the work of the Greek translator. There are also instances where gender inclusive language has been achieved by converting generic masculine singular pronouns and verbs to common gender plural pronouns and verbs or by altering active constructions to passive. Sometimes this practice so alters the formal equivalence between NRSV and the Hebrew that the formal equivalence between the Greek and the Hebrew cannot be fairly represented this way. Ecclesiast 4.14 and 8.12 may illustrate the attempt in NETS to represent the exact way in which the Greek reproduces the Hebrew text.

E DITORIAL P OLICY

While the Greek translator does not always read the beginning and ending of sentences or connections between clauses in the Hebrew in the same way as NRSV, in essence the same versification is used. Differences can be indicated by different grammar and punctuation.

B IBLIOGRAPHICAL N OTE

NETS is for the most part a fresh translation of the Greek adapted to NRSV. Occasionally, the translation of Brenton was consulted and found to be useful.
