---
cssclasses: [osb-intro]
book: "Isaiah"
source: "OSB"
up: "[[Isaiah]]"
---

ESAIAS TO THE READER

E DITION OF THE G REEK T EXT

It is important to note that the earlier English translations of the LXX by Thomson and Brenton were based on editions of the Greek version that essentially reproduced the text of Codex Vaticanus. While this important manuscript preserves an excellent text for most books of the LXX, it is less trustworthy in the case of Esaias. (R. R. Ottley, for his translation, used Codex Alexandrinus, our best available witness for Esaias.) As a result, the reader will find a large number of textual differences between those earlier English translations and the present one, which is based on the full-fledged critical edition of J. Ziegler ( Septuaginta: Vetus Testamentum Graecum Auctoritate Academiae Scientiarum Gottingensis editum XIV: Isaias [Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1967]).

Ziegler’s reconstructed text is very similar to that found in Rahlfs’ Septuaginta . If we set aside differences that do not show up in an English translation (primarily Greek orthographic variants), we find approximately ninety places where the two editions differ, and many of these variations are relatively minor. I have accepted Ziegler’s judgment in all but sixteen of these (10.7; 13.3; 14.27; 26.18; 28.2–3; 41.29[ bis ]; 42.4; 49.13; 50.3; 51.16; 54.5; 55.13; 56.5; 61.3; 63.12), some of which involve conjectural emendations that are reasonable, even brilliant, but not totally persuasive. In addition, there are two places where Rahlfs and Ziegler agree but where I have reluctantly gone my own way (9.1[8.23] and 53.11; in the latter passage I have accepted an old conjectural emendation).

Many readers of NETS will not have easy access to Ziegler’s edition. If they use the present translation in conjunction with Rahlfs’ text, it will often be unclear whether departures from the latter are only apparent (the result of a non-literal rendering) or substantial (the result of a textual variation). Since NETS includes textual notes only when it departs from the base text (Ziegler), it may be helpful to the reader to have a list of those verses where the present translation reflects a text different from Rahlfs’ edition. They are as follow: 2.20; 5.9; 5.29; 7.6; 8.18; 9.4(3); 10.1; 10.10(bis); 10.22; 11.5; 12.2; 12.6(bis); 13.3; 14.13; 15.2; 15.4; 16.3; 16.5; 16.7; 17.5; 17.6; 18.7; 20.1; 21.13; 22.1; 23.13; 23.16; 25.5; 25.9; 28.15; 29.8; 30.14; 30.33; 33.18; 34.10; 36.19; 37.12; 37.13; 37.32; 37.38; 40.4; 40.25; 40.28; 41.23; 43.17; 44.16; 45.4; 45.9; 45.13; 46.11; 47.10; 48.5(bis); 48.16; 49.6; 49.7; 49.15; 51.5; 53.2; 54.3; 54.8; 54.10; 54.17(bis); 56.11; 58.11(bis); 60.6; 61.4; 61.8; 65.11; 65.23; 66.8(bis); 66.17(misprint).

T RANSLATION P ROFILE OF THE G REEK

Attempts to evaluate the Greek translation of Esaias in the past have typically failed to note the complexity of such a task. One can find numerous passages where the translator has failed to understand the Hebrew text and where his Greek appears to be solecistic and even unintelligible. It is therefore natural to infer that he lacked competence. The problem with this conclusion, however, is that it does not take into account the skill, knowledge and creativity that he displays in many other passages. Moreover, any generalizations about the translator’s technique run afoul of the startling variations in his approach.

Consider, for example, the first half dozen verses in chapter 43. It is apparent that the translator had no trouble whatever understanding the Hebrew text and that he was capable of representing the meaning of the original in simple, clear and faultless Greek. His approach here may be characterized as moderately literal, resulting in a certain quaintness of style that betrays its Semitic background. Admittedly, the Hebrew of this passage is not particularly difficult. Elsewhere, if the translator encounters a rare word, he seems to lose his bearings. In 28.20, the Hebrew appears to mean, “For the bed is [too] short for stretching, and the covering [too] narrow for gathering [i.e., wrapping] oneself.” Here the Hebrew words for “bed” (which appears nowhere else in the Bible) and “stretching” (which is rare) stumped the translator. Exercising his imagination, he came up with this, “We are in straits and unable to fight, and we ourselves are too weak to be mobilized.” We should remember, however, that even modern scholarship is less than confident about the meaning of numerous sentences in the Hebrew text of Isaiah.

In some of his renderings, the translator appears to be slavishly literal, but it is clear that, as a whole, he felt free to vary his vocabulary and restructure the syntax if it served his purposes. That sense of freedom allowed him at times to go off on tangents that have little connection with the Hebrew. Indeed, on occasions the meaning of his translation is patently contrary to that of the original (cf. the negative he introduces at 8.14, “you will not encounter him as a stumbling caused by a stone”). What may have been going on in his mind at those times is an intriguing question, but we would be wrong to infer that he was unconcerned about being faithful to the text. There can be no doubt that he struggled mightily to make sense of difficult passages, and that even when he seems to go beyond the text, he is sensitive to the thrust of the book as a whole and seeks to come up with teachings that are up-building (note that at the beginning of 8.14 the addition of the clause “if you trust in him” effectively links this verse with a recurring theme in the book).

All of this means that we cannot easily describe lexical and grammatical patterns in the translator’s handling of the Hebrew text. Some can certainly be identified, but the exceptions to those patterns are significant, and they prevent us from making many valid generalizations. As we might expect, he follows some of the lexical equations established by the Greek translators of the Pentateuch, such as = in the sense of “covenant.” For Hebrew he normally uses (“Hades”), but in 28.15, 18 we find , “death.” There is no need to multiply examples. Beyond these more-or-less standard calques, the translator naturally comes up with a few equivalences of his own, but not in uniform fashion. With regard to syntax, while his tendency is to follow the simple structure of the Hebrew clauses, he does not hesitate to introduce variety and to exploit some of the resources of the Greek language; still, many of the niceties one routinely finds in original Greek composition are missing. Special note should be made of the translator’s fairly consistent representation of the Hebrew perfect tense (which can have various temporal references) with the Greek aorist (a simple past tense). Although the choice of the aorist is appropriate when the context clearly indicates a past action or a gnomic idea (e.g., 1.3, “The ox knew [=knows] its owner”), his overuse of this tense lends a distinct and odd quality to his translation.

T HE NETS T RANSLATION OF E SAIAS

Given the Greek translator’s inconsistent approach (or so it appears to us), an English translation of his work faces special problems. The challenges are compounded by the need to follow the pattern of the NRSV. Numerous stylistic variations frequently used by the latter (as it renders the Hebrew text) introduce an additional and deeper level of inconsistency to the endeavor.

The user of NETS deserves to know that the present translation has gone through two distinct stages. The initial draft reflected a special effort not only to understand what the Greek translator meant (for which the sense of the Hebrew is an important piece of evidence), but also to communicate that meaning in fairly clear and natural English when possible (often the irregularities of the Greek called for less than fluent English). That first draft, in addition, sought to maximize the potential for NETS/NRSV synoptic study; in other words, it preserved NRSV renderings whenever these could be defended as reasonable representations of the Greek.

In the opinion of the editors, however, such an approach was inconsistent with the aim of NETS to represent not only what the Greek says but also how it is being said. For the sake of uniformity with the project as a whole, therefore, hundreds of changes were made that result in unclear or even unnatural English (e.g., “wept with weeping”). Moreover, the reader should be advised not to assume that a difference between NETS and NRSV reflects a difference between the Hebrew and the Greek.

Even in the first draft of this translation, NRSV renderings were changed in cases where the Hebrew is idiomatic but the Greek equivalence appears odd. In particular, note that the Greek translator fairly consistently translates the Hebrew (“man”) with , even in passages where such an equivalence is inappropriate, including instances when the Hebrew has a distributive meaning, “each.” The Greek translator is quite capable of rendering these uses idiomatically. For example, in 13.8, the Hebrew (lit., “a man to his neighbor”) is rendered (“one to another”). It seems advisable to render the Greek to English literally in cases where the Greek inappropriately renders the Hebrew literally. The reader of NETS will thus notice a large number of instances of the singular “man” the unusual flavor of the resulting English corresponds to some extent with the peculiar quality of the Greek.

The strophic arrangement of the NRSV has been followed as much as possible to facilitate comparison, but it must not be thought that the Greek always has a corresponding poetic quality.

B IBLIOGRAPHICAL N OTE

I have profited greatly from R. R. Ottley, The Book of Isaiah according to the LXX (Codex Alexandrinus) (3 vols; London: Cambridge University Press, 1904–1906). The first volume contains an important introduction (including a discussion of the Greek translator’s “Method of Rendering”) and a translation of the Hebrew and the Greek on facing pages. Volume 2 presents the Greek text with a critical apparatus, followed by extensive notes that pay special attention to the divergences between the Greek translation and the Hebrew original. A third, slim volume simply includes the text by itself.

Joseph Ziegler’s Untersuchungen zur Septuaginta des Buches Isaias (Alttestamentliche Abhandlungen 12/3; Münster: Aschendorff, 1934), which may be regarded as a prolegomenon to his critical edition, remains to this day the most penetrating and reliable source of information. The highly regarded monograph by I. L. Seeligmann, The Septuagint Version of Isaiah: A Discussion of Its Problems (Leiden: Brill, 1948), has chapters on textual criticism, translation technique, historical background and Jewish theology. More recently, Arie van der Kooij has produced a very full and helpful analysis of one chapter, The Oracle of Tyre: The Septuagint of Isaiah XXIII as Version and Vision (VTSup 71; Leiden: Brill, 1998).

A CKNOWLEDGMENTS

I wish to express my appreciation to my former student assistant Carl Franzon (Byington Scholar at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary) for producing an initial collation showing the textual differences between the editions of Rahlfs and Ziegler. His careful labor greatly facilitated my subsequent work.

I am also greatly indebted to Albert Pietersma for his thorough review of the initial translation. His sharp eye saved me from embarrassment at numerous points, and his mastery of Greek and LXX studies improved the quality of the work in significant ways.
