---
cssclasses: [osb-intro]
book: "Wisdom of Solomon"
source: "OSB"
up: "[[Wisdom of Solomon]]"
---

IOB TO THE READER

E DITION OF THE G REEK T EXT

The NETS translation of Iob is based on the critical edition prepared by Joseph Ziegler ( Septuaginta: Vetus Testamentum Graecum Auctoritate Academiae Scientiarum Gottingensis editum XI.4: Iob [Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1982]). There are a few divergences from this edition, following suggestions made by A. Pietersma in his review of Iob and by P. Gentry in “Proposed Corrections to the Lemma of Ziegler’s Edition,” Appendix D in his The Asterisked Materials in the Greek Job . Departures from Ziegler are signaled in textual notes except for four of Gentry’s five corrections to the presentation of the Origenian asterisk tradition (2.1d, 13a; 9.3b; 12.21b—27.19a is retained as Old Greek in NETS).

T RANSLATION P ROFILE OF THE G REEK

General Character

Though the Hebrew text of Iob has, for the most part, been composed in poetry, it includes three sections in prose as well, namely, 1.1–2.13; 32.1–5 and 42.7–17. In the Greek, the entire book is in prose, even though arranged stichometrically, in the manuscript tradition. Ziegler reflects the Greek manuscripts, but NETS follows the NRSV, except when the Greek text demands otherwise.

The Old Greek (OG) Iob is a work of good literary quality. Absent are the usual “Hebraisms” that are the tell-tale signs of translation Greek in much of the Septuagint corpus. For example, at 1.5 we find the common construction “and it happened” in the Hebrew text. This is commonly translated in the LXX by “and it came to pass.” Most modern English translations disregard this Hebraism, as does the NRSV. The OG translator is not satisfied with it either, choosing to begin the sentence with “And when.” Similarly, in the previous verse, 1.4, the Hebrew conjunction (usually “and”) + verb . . . + verb . . . + verb . . . + verb is rendered by participle + (“and”) . . . verb . . . participle—the last two Hebrew verbs folded into a single participle. The participial constructions represent standard Greek style. The NRSV translation of v. 4 is “[And] his sons used to go and hold feasts . . . and they would send and invite”; that of NETS is “Now his sons used to gather …, and hold a feast . . . they used to take along their three sisters.” Many other examples could be cited, but the point is that OG Iob stands as a clear foil to the interlinear paradigm of translation.

A cursory overview of the OG text of Iob reveals that it is substantially shorter than the MT, the form of the Hebrew text which appears to have been its parent text. This abbreviation increases as one reads through the book. Gray calculated that the proportion of omissions grows as follows: 4% until chapter 15; 16% of chapters 15–21; 25% of chapters 22–31; 35% of chapters 32–37; 16% of chapters 38–42 (lxxv; repeated in Dhorme, ccii–cciii). The shorter Greek text seems to be rooted in at least two characteristics of the Hebrew text. First, the meaning of the Hebrew is sometimes obscure; second, the argumentation in the book is repetitious. A third consideration may have made abbreviation acceptable: Iob may not have carried the same authority as other books of the Hebrew Scriptures. Abbreviation also extends to the “micro-level” where it can involve the reduction of two lines to one—something we might call paraphrasing.

It has sometimes been suggested that Greek Iob is based upon an equally shorter Hebrew parent text. However, on the basis of what we can establish about the translator’s technique, i.e., his rather free, even paraphrastic approach, it seems more likely that the shorter text is to be attributed to the time of translation.

The usual categories of characterizing a translation fail us when we assess Iob. It is not just free or paraphrastic, it is also something of an epitome of the longer and often difficult original. OG Iob is one of a kind in the Septuagint corpus. We can typify it as among the least literal, both in its attitude toward abbreviating the parent text and in the way the translator worked with that portion of the text for which we have a translation.

While the text as a whole reveals conscious shortening, there are various additions made along the way. The major ones are: the diatribe of Iob’s wife in 2.9a–d—though this may be a later addition (“probably,” according to Fernández Marcos, 261, citing Heater, 31–36)—and 42.17aα–eα, which is said to derive “from the Syriac book.”

Another general characteristic of the translation consists of transferring passages from elsewhere in Iob or from other parts of the Septuagint into the translation. This practice was detected by Dhorme and Ziegler and has been the subject of a study by Heater, who calls it “the anaphoric translation technique.” For example, 4.21a = Esa 40.24b; 22.2 = 21.22a; 22.28a = 8.6b; 34.13 was inspired by Ps 24.1; 34.15b; “[W]hence too he was formed” is a gloss that derives from Gen 3.19; 36.5a = 8.20a.

Finally, the translator’s use of particles of all kinds should be noted. As Kitto says, “Greek is well stocked with little words, conjunctions that hunt in couples or in packs, whose sole function is to make the structure clear. They act, as it were, as signposts” (27). This seems to be the translator’s intent in Iob, i.e., to give the rather loosely linked Hebrew text a connectedness. So the translation is heavily salted with particles: “and,” “but,” “now,” “because,” “for,” “really?,” “on the one hand . . . on the other,” “however,” “therefore,” “rather,” “again,” “or” and others. None of these is more striking than the multi-particle “but; nonetheless; to the contrary” (2.5a; 5.8a; 12.6a; 13.3a; 17.10a; 21.17a; 27.7a; 33.1a; 34.36a). The interest in structure seems evident, for example, in chapter 9 where γάρ—commonly “for”—is added thirteen times: vv. 2b, 3a, 4a, 13a, 15a, 18a, 19a, 20a, 21a, 24a, 27a, 28b, 30a, in addition to its use as translation at vv. 32a, 35b, or at 22.5b–9 where each line begins with “and; but,” “but not; nor” (7a) or “but” (7b) to form a list and to add connectors to the Hebrew for vv. 7a and 9a. In short, unlike most other Septuagintal translators, Iob uses particles more in accord with standard Greek discourse.

Specific Comments on the Old Greek Translation

We must imagine the Hebrew text in front of the translator. It was an unvocalized text—that is, it had only the consonants—and there may have been no divisions between the words (on this issue: Tov, 117–121); there was no versification. The lack of vowel markings permitted the text to be vocalized, and therefore understood, in more than one way sometimes—though there was doubtless a tradition of vocalization. A different vocalization helps to explain some instances where the English translation of the Greek appears to be rather different from the NRSV. For example, at 24.18b was vocalized not (“not) but as (“Let”).

The translator was responsible for dividing the text into small segments according to sense. Sometimes this results in a somewhat different division than is reflected in the MT. For example, the words “with you” at 36.4b have been taken with v. 5 (paraphrased as “But know that”—so Dhorme).

Some letters of the Hebrew alphabet are easily confused in the manuscript tradition, and Greek Iob reflects this. Indeed, it might even be that the translator, aware of these confusions, bore them in mind as he tried out various possibilities for producing a translation. Numerous examples can be cited. First, in Hebrew manuscripts the (daleth) and (resh) can be confused because they look alike. For example, we find read as at 21.22b (so “murders” instead of “those that are on high”); 40.11a (“messengers” instead of “overflowings”); read as at 41.14b (NRSV 22b) (“runs” instead of “dances”). Second, the consonants y (yod) and (waw) can be confused: so we find for (twice) at 26.13a (“bars of” instead of “By his wind”). Third, (sin) and (shin) share the same consonant: so appears to have been read instead of at 41.22a (NRSV 30) (“sharp” rather than “potsherds”).

Sometimes the translator re-orders the Hebrew consonants: for example, for (19.20a—where is also read for , therefore “rotted” instead of “cling”); possibly for (39.4a[Greek 3a], “did you rear” rather than “become strong”); for (21.10b, “falter” instead of “miscarries”); for (41.1b[NRSV 9b], “what is said” instead of “the sight of it”). Indeed, the translator sometimes changes consonants: for example, for (32.13b, “[we] contributed it” instead of “[God] may vanquish him”); for (41.26b[NRSV 34b], “that are in the waters” instead of “that are proud”); for (22.23a, “[you] humble yourself” rather than “you will be restored”). It seems that these changes result from a particular approach to the Hebrew text, one that goes to considerable lengths to make a certain sense of it, even to the extent of changing and rearranging letters of words to do so.

An awareness of these aspects of the translator’s work helps one to understand why an English translation of the OG looks quite different from a translation of the Hebrew text.

T HE E CCLESIASTICAL T EXT

OG Iob is about one-sixth shorter than the MT. That shorter text, without the fragments of Theodotion, is attested only in the Sahidic version and some Old Latin quotations. Except for these witnesses the entire textual tradition has been accommodated to the work of the third century CE text critic Origen in his massive project we call “the Hexapla.”

The designation “Hexapla” is given to a presumed six-columned book—only fragments are extant—in which Origen compared the Septuagint and several other translations with the traditional Hebrew text of his day. From the left, the six columns were: the Hebrew, the Hebrew in Greek transliteration, Aquila’s translation, Symmachus’ translation, the Septuagint, and Theodotion’s translation. The texts were reproduced word-by-word or phrase-by-phrase down the page and, by following the columns across, one could compare the texts at a glance. Origen’s primary interest was in the first and fifth columns, that is, the Hebrew and the Septuagint.

Now the Septuagint is not always of the same length as the Hebrew, and in the book of Iob that is dramatically the case. Where the OG is longer than the Hebrew, Origen marked what makes it longer with an obelus (÷) in front and a metobelus ( ) at the end; where the OG was shorter than the Hebrew, he added to it, typically from Theodotion, in order to make it the same length as the Hebrew and marked it with an asterisk ( ) and a metobelus. (The translation we designate “Theodotion” is associated with the name of a translator or reviser who lived at the end of the second century CE. It is a literal translation and even includes some transliterations, as at Iob 37.12; 39.13.)

The consequences of Origen’s work on Iob are chiefly two: first, two entirely different translations are now intermingled; second, since the OG translator sometimes uses only one line to render two lines of Hebrew, the “ecclesiastical” text produces a translation where some lines of the Hebrew are represented twice, once in the OG and again in Theodotion. For example, the OG translator omitted 18.9a and translated only 18.9b, but Origen’s mechanical approach led him to add 18.9b from Theodotion. This means that 18.9b has two renderings in the ecclesiastical text, though 18.9a is not represented at all. Similarly, 23.14 was not part of the OG, but what Origen added from Theodotion is v. 15. As a result, v. 15 appears twice in the ecclesiastical text, in the OG as v. 15ab and from Theodotion under the asterisk as v. 15cd. There is no translation of v. 14.

Both Rahlfs’ provisional edition (1935) and Ziegler’s critical edition reproduce the text that Origen conflated, and the two translations are punctuated as if they were one translation. The NETS translation follows the OG text but, as an aid to readers, includes Theodotion, inserted into the appropriate places but not integrated. Not only have the intrusive fragments of text been duly marked, they also lack initial uppercase, as well as closing punctuation. The English translation of Theodotion’s work seeks to be more “literal” than that of OG Iob, reflecting the nature of its parent text.

T HE NETS T RANSLATION OF I OB

The Hebrew text of Iob presents such a level of difficulty in translation that those who work on it have often made recourse to the OG translation. This is reflected in the notes that accompany translations into English, including the NRSV. Therefore, readers of NETS Iob will find occasional points of contact between the NRSV and NETS that are due to the NRSV adopting an understanding of the Hebrew that is dependent upon the OG.

The NETS translation of Iob aspires to the same economy of expression that is true of the NRSV, which makes the translator’s interest in “connector words” all the more apparent.

Readers of NETS will often note a difference in the tense of verbs from what is found in the NRSV. Usually this has resulted from the rendering of the Hebrew prefixed conjugation into Greek by an aorist (“simple past”) tense. It appears that the translator understood these prefixed forms as preterites, i.e., as expressions of the simple past. Normally the aorist tense in NETS Iob is rendered by an English simple past, though at times a present perfect is used when the context seems to require it.

Gender Specific Language in NETS Iob

The NRSV usually accomplishes gender inclusivity by rendering masculine singular forms as plurals. The NETS Iob differs from the NRSV in this respect, for the following reason. The change the NRSV incorporates is most noticeable in passages that involve either “the life of a mortal” (e.g., 10.4–5; 14.5–6) or groups of people, usually the impious or wicked (the most extensive passage is 15.20–35). In the NRSV these all become plural for the sake of inclusivity. But in the former case, involving “the life of a mortal,” the remarks, on Iob’s lips, have “a person like me” sense and on his opponents’ “a person like you” sense, and the edge is taken away if one uses the plural. The same holds true for passages about the impious or wicked. Here the opponents and Iob argue back and forth. The fact that the opponents speak of the wicked in the singular might lead one to think that they do not have “the wicked” in general in view, but Iob; the same holds true when Iob responds using the singular: he has his immediate opponent in view! In two passages Iob speaks of the wicked in the plural (12.5–6a; 21.7–18) and in those cases one might argue that he has his three friends in mind. So NETS Iob follows the OG in number to preserve “the bite” of the argument.

E DITORIAL D ETAIL

Generally the translation has been divided into portions within chapters according to the NRSV; occasional divergences in this regard result from the translator’s abbreviation of the Hebrew text. So, for example, there is a division between 16.6 and 7, rather than between 16.5 and 6 as found in the NRSV.

Punctuation usually follows Ziegler’s edition, but not always, because Ziegler treats the ecclesiastical text as of one piece. The translation of Theodotion has also been punctuated, according to the NRSV, where the fragments are of sufficient length to make that possible.

There is a difference in versification among English translations, MT and OG as reflected in Ziegler at the end of chapter 40 and the beginning of chapter 41. I have followed Ziegler and MT but noted the versification of the NRSV.

B IBLIOGRAPHICAL N OTE

Along with the standard Greek and Hebrew lexica and grammars the following works have played an active role in my work on NETS Iob: Georg Beer, Der Text des Buches Hiob (Marburg: N.G. Elwertsche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1897); Shaye J. D. Cohen, From the Maccabees to the Mishnah (LEC 7; Philadelphia: Westminster, 1987); édouard Dhorme, A Commentary on the Book of Job (Tr. Harold Knight; Nashville: Nelson, 1984 [1967; French, 1926]); Samuel Rolles Driver and George Buchanan Gray, A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on The Book of Job (ICC; Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1921; reprint, 1986); Peter J. Gentry, The Askerisked Materials in the Greek Job (SBLSCS 38; Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1995); Natalio Fernández Marcos, “The Septuagint Reading of the Book of Job,” in The Book of Job (Ed. W. A. M. Beuken; BETL 114; Leuven: University Press/Peeters, 1994) 251–266; Homer Heater, Jr., A Septuagint Translation Technique in the Book of Job (CBQMS 11; Washington DC: Catholic Biblical Association of America, 1982); H. D. F. Kitto, The Greeks (Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin, 1973 (1951; revised ed., 1957); Albert Pietersma, Review of Iob. Septuaginta: Vetus Testamentum Graecum, 11/4 , ed. by Joseph Ziegler, in JBL 104 (1985) 305–311; Alfred Rahlfs, Septuaginta. Id est Vetus Testamentum graece iuxta LXX interpretes (Stuttgart: Würtembergische Bibelanstalt, 1935); Emanuel Tov, The Text-Critical Use of the Septuagint in Biblical Research (2nd ed., revised and enlarged; Jerusalem Biblical Studies 8; Jerusalem: Simor Ltd., 1997).

Finally, it has been an experience full of insights to have had Albert Pietersma work closely with me on revising my translation of OG Iob for publication. The resulting translation is vastly improved and our extended conversation always stimulated my thinking about OG Iob, in connection with both its text and its message.
