---
cssclasses: [osb-intro]
book: "Ezekiel"
source: "OSB"
up: "[[Ezekiel]]"
---

IEZEKIEL TO THE READER

E DITION OF THE G REEK T EXT

The NETS version of Iezekiel (Ezekiel) follows the Greek edition by Joseph Ziegler Septuaginta: Vetus Testamentum Graecum Auctoritate Academiae Scientiarum Gottingensis editum XVI.1: Ezekiel (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1977) in all points with the exception of some matters of punctuation and sentence divisions.

With the MT as the point of comparison, the LXX text features numerous omissions as well as some additions. Larger omissions occur in chaps. 32 and 33, where all of 32.19; and 33.26 are absent from the Septuagint text, and the larger part of 32.23, 25, 31; 33.25 and 27 are lacking. Larger plusses occur in Iezek 40.6–8 and 43 and 44. The reader will also note a shuffling in the order of verses at the beginning of chap. 7.

T RANSLATION P ROFILE OF THE G REEK

The Greek translators follow an isomorphic model of translation quite closely, preferring to employ a Greek item to represent each Hebrew item. But within this approach, (explained as the interlinear model; see “TO THE READER OF NETS”), the Greek translators employ relative freedom in the choice of the exact terms used in various contexts. The translation shows both semantic leveling, as one Greek term can be used to represent several Hebrew terms, but it also shows a great deal of semantic differentiation, as many Greek terms can be used to render one Hebrew term. To cite a particularly clear example of semantic differentiation, the single Hebrew term “sword” is translated by four different Greek terms: “sword” , “dagger” , “hand-knife” and “rapier” . The first two terms alternate as the most common translation of depending on the political context of the prophesies, while the latter two terms occur only five times overall, being reserved for specific contexts. In chaps. 5–24 where the prophecies concern Israel, the standard translation is “sword” , occurring 34 x , whereas “dagger” only occurs twice in these same chapters. The relative frequency inverts in chaps. 25–32 where the focus of the prophecies shifts to other nations. There “dagger” occurs 27 x compared to only 7 for “sword” . Then in chap. 33 the situation inverts again as the focus of the prophecies shifts back to Israel and “sword” occurs 5 x compared to one for “dagger” . In yet another reversal the prophecies concerning Gog and Magog in chaps. 38 and 39 “dagger” occurs four times as the exclusive translation for . “Hand-knife” occurs only three times, in 21.3, 4 and 5, where it describes the Lord’s own weapon, and “rapier” occurs only in 16.40 and 23.47, in both contexts describing a lover’s sword used to slay a prostitute.

The choice of terms in many cases possibly reflects changes made according to political contexts, since terms seem to vary based upon the nation being discussed, be it Israel, Egypt, Idumea (Edom), Tyre, Sidon or others. While it is possible that the translators were trying to be sensitive to political nuances, another explanation would be that different translators handled different materials and therefore word choices reflect the individual preferences of separate translators.

So for example, the terms for political leaders show both semantic leveling and differentiation that generally correspond to political contexts. The translators seem to avoid using royal language to describe the rulers of Israel, even when the Hebrew employs royal language to describe them. Instead, to describe the leaders in Israel the translators use the rather generic terms “leader/guide” and “guide/leader” or “ruler” . So even when the Hebrew uses the term “king” three times to describe the kings of Israel in 43.7 and 9, the Greek translators use the term “guide/leader” . Elsewhere, the translators regularly use the royal term “king” to translate , but in those contexts it does not describe the kings of Israel but rather the kings of Babylon (17.12 and 16 and elsewhere), of the earth (27.33), of the islands (27.35), of Egypt (29.2; 30.10 and elsewhere). The only king of Israel or Judah who bears the title “king” is Ioakim in 1.2. Even Dauid is not described as “king” in 37.24 but rather as “ruler” , even though the Hebrew reads “king” . Likewise, the term , which the NRSV translates as “prince” when referring to princes in Israel, is rendered with the terms “ruler” , “leader/guide” and “guide/leader” (see 12.12; 46.2; 45.7).

The translators also (possibly) show variations in their choice of terms to describe the destruction of different political entities, including cities and countries. So they translate the term “desolation” as “annihilation” , i.e., devastation to the point of complete disappearance, when describing the destruction of Israel in chaps. 6–23. But when describing the “desolation” of Egypt in chap. 29, the Greek has the term “destruction/ruin” , and then “desolation” when describing Mount Seir in chap. 35, which implies that the land is emptied but still exists. So “wilderness” translates the term “wilderness” in chaps. 6–20, when the discussion concerns Israel; then it translates “ruins” in chaps. 25–30 when the discussion switches to Edom, Tyre and Egypt. In chaps. 33–35 where the discussion concerns the mountains of Seir and Israel, “wilderness” translates “desolation” . Then in chaps. 36 and 38, which promise the restoration of the ruined areas in Israel, “wilderness” once again translates “ruins” . Other words for destruction in both noun and verb forms show similar patterns of differentiation.

As a final set of examples of possible political contextualization, the terms regarding sin show a high degree of differentiation in various political contexts, although not as consistently as the terms for rulers or even the terms for destruction. So the term “misdeed” is rendered as “injustice” in chaps. 3–24, regarding the sin of Israel. An exception occurs in 16.49, in the long comparison of Israel to a prostitute where “misdeed” is translated as “lawless act” . But the same term “misdeed” is rendered as “sin” regarding the ruler of Tyre in 28.18 and as “lawlessness” regarding the misdeeds of Egypt, Mosoch (Meshech) and Thobel (Tubal) in 29.16 and 32.27. Then, in chaps. 33–44, where the discussion reverts to Israel, “misdeed” is translated by four different terms, “lawlessness” , “impiety” , “sin” and “injustice” in 33.8; 33.9; 39.23 and 44.10, respectively.

The variation of terms found in the Greek translation does not concern only political contexts but is reflected in many other terms as well. For example, the term “spirit” or “wind” is translated by six different Greek terms: “wind” , “spirit/wind” , “blast/breath” , “fervor” , “face” and “part” , depending on the precise linguistic context.

As a result of the nuancing of their terms, the translators produce a Greek text that is, for the most part, quite understandable, although their excessive literalism can present problems for the reader of the Greek text. Very problematic is the lack of nuance shown in rendering the Hebrew word “give,” which can also mean “to set,” “establish,” “appoint” or “turn into.” But despite the variations of the Hebrew meanings, the translators almost always render it with “give,” which does not have the same extended range of meanings as does Hebrew , with the result that many turns of phrase must have sounded odd to a Greek ear.

Also problematic is the literal translation of the Hebrew oath formula, as exemplified in 16.48: “I live, says the Lord, if your sister Sodoma has acted, she and her daughters, as you and your daughters acted! …” What follows the “if” clause is left unspoken, so the reader is left with an unresolved conditional clause and a sentence fragment.

T HE NETS T RANSLATION

There are two ways to depart from a literal one-for-one correspondence of Greek terms for Hebrew terms. Either several Greek terms can be used to translate a single Hebrew term or a single Greek term can be used for several Hebrew terms. Both are commonplace in the Greek translation of Iezekiel in a way that cannot be characterized as either pure semantic leveling or as pure semantic nuancing, because one-for-many and many-for-one substitutions occur for the same terms. So, for example, the Greek term “stretch out” translates five different Hebrew terms: (1.11); (1.23); (2.9); (1.22); and (37.6). Taken by itself it would appear to be a case of semantic leveling. But if one looks at , one of the Hebrew terms translated by is itself translated by five distinct Greek terms: (3.6); (7.3); (8.3); (14.19); (44.20). As a result, it is impossible to assert that the translators were leveling the translations for the term and related terms. There is an interlocking pattern of both one-for-many and many-for-one substitutions.

As a result where there is a pattern of one-for-one translations for terms, NETS also follows a straight one-for-one substitution following the NRSV, as much as possible. But where there is a many-for-one pattern interwoven with a one-for-many pattern, NETS varies the terms that are used for the Greek terms, as much as possible. Each Greek-for-Hebrew translation couplet is represented by distinct English terms. So when translates , it is represented in NETS by “extend,” but when it translates , it is represented by “stretch out,” since is being used in two different ways. Likewise, when is translated by , NETS uses “send,” whereas when is translated by , again NETS uses “extend,” because two different terms are being used to translate a single Greek term. Since the translations display neither pure leveling nor nuancing, the departures from literal one-for-one substitutions are both marked by a variation of the terms in NETS.

As for the exceptional one-for-one literalism in the use of for , NETS seeks to represent the problem by rendering “give” with synonyms for “give,” even when they produce a somewhat forced translation, to try to represent the literalism of the Greek translation with regard to the term.

Finally, there are numerous cases of disagreement between subject and verb of the sentence, where a plural noun disagrees with a singular verb. In these cases, the offending noun and pronoun or verb are rendered as they are in Greek to indicate a disruption of the normal pattern of grammatical agreement. For example 3.7 reads: “But the house of Israel shall not be willing to listen to you, for they do not wish to listen to me, because all the house of Israel are contentious and hard-hearted.” The singular “house of Israel” does not agree with the plural forms of the verb in the next clauses, resulting in a lack of agreement in the NETS translation.

B IBLIOGRAPHICAL N OTE

I would like to thank Albert Pietersma for all his insightful comments regarding the translation of Iezekiel, Benjamin Wright for his efforts to organize the project and keep it on track, and Matt Olsen and my wife, Meredyth Hubler, for their patient proofreading. Good use has been made of the standard grammars and lexica.
