---
cssclasses: [osb-intro]
book: "Sirach"
source: "OSB"
up: "[[Sirach]]"
---

WISDOM OF SALOMON TO THE READER

E DITION OF THE G REEK T EXT

The NETS translation of the Wisdom of Salomon (WisSal) is based on the edition of Joseph Ziegler, Sapientia Salomonis ( Septuaginta: Vetus Testamentum Graecum Auctoritate Academiae Scientiarum Gottingensis editum XII.1, 2 [Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1962 (durchgesehene Auflage, 1962)]). This fully-fledged critical edition is based primarily on the evidence of the major Greek witnesses, Codex Vaticanus (B) and Codex Sinaiticus (S), which Ziegler believed to be related, and Codex Alexandrinus (A), but it also draws on the evidence of all the other Greek witnesses and of the versions, particularly the Old Latin. This (the Old Latin) dates from the second half of the second century and is of particular importance because it is based on Greek manuscripts earlier than any still extant. In addition to Ziegler’s edition, I have consulted the manual edition of the Septuagint edited by Alfred Rahlfs ( Septuaginta. Id est Vetus Testamentum graece iuxta LXX interpretes, 2 vols . [Stuttgart: Württembergische Bibelanstalt, 1935]), which was used as the basis of the NRSV of the Wisdom of Salomon (Solomon).

I have diverged from the critical text established by Ziegler in only six cases. In two of these, Ziegler adopted into his text readings based on the evidence of the Old Latin: in 2.9 I read , which is attested by most of the Greek witnesses, and not (= pratum of the Old Latin), and in 18.23 I read , attested by all the Greek witnesses, and not (= Old Latin impetum ). In 12.5 I follow an old conjecture and read in place of . In 7.1 I read with B*-S, not , and in 15.14 I read , which is attested by many Greek manuscripts and seems to be required by the sense, not . Finally, in 15.17 I read with S and other Greek witnesses, not . In all six cases the reading I have adopted corresponds to that followed by the NRSV.

C HARACTER OF THE G REEK

There is widespread recognition that the WisSal was composed in Greek, and the few suggestions that have been made for composition in Hebrew or Aramaic and for translation into Greek have found little support. The book is an example of a protreptic work ( ), an exhortation to adopt a particular philosophy, and it deploys literary genres familiar from Hellenistic rhetorical texts including the diatribe (1.1–6.11 + 6.17–20; 11.15–15.19), the “problem” genre (6.12–16 + 6.21–10.21), and the comparison ( , 11.1–14 + 16.1–19.22). Correspondingly, as Reese in his important study of the literary style and vocabulary of WisSal has shown, 1 the book is written in a good Greek style and shows none of the characteristics of translation Greek. The author does adapt his style to the point that he makes use of parallelismus membrorum , which is a characteristic feature of Hebrew verse, but he also employs “the features of florid Greek rhetorical prose.” 2 The author uses a full range of Hellenistic stylistic devices, and this is evident particularly in his very frequent use of hyperbaton, both hyperbaton involving the separation of the article from its substantive and hyperbaton not linked to an article. A common type of the latter in Wisdom is the placing of a verb form between a noun and its modifier, e.g., (4.2). 3

The very frequent use of hyperbaton is obvious on even a casual reading of the Greek of the WisSal. But the rhetorical character of the Greek is likewise evident in the frequent occurrence of different types of wordplay, such as assonance and alliteration. 4 The author also employs various figures of speech that are typical of Hellenistic Greek, of which the sorites of 6.17–20 is merely the best known example.

The vocabulary of the WisSal is quite distinctive within the context of the Septuagint and reflects the Hellenistic milieu in which the book was composed, as Reese has demonstrated. 5 On the one hand, the author uses a number of words familiar from the Septuagint but with their normal meaning in Greek. For example, the word occurs in 17.17 and 19.4 in the sense familiar from Greek of “necessity, fate,” but when it is used in the Septuagint in books translated from Hebrew, it always has the meaning “distress, anguish” (e.g., Ps 106[107].6). On the other hand, the author uses 335 words (out of a total vocabulary of 1734 different words) that do not occur in any other canonical book of the Septuagint, and Reese has shown that many of these are characteristic of Hellenistic religious, philosophical, ethical, and psychological vocabulary. The use of Hellenistic religious vocabulary in the WisSal is pervasive and includes such words 6 as (“reflection,” 7.26) and (“sitting by,” hence “throne-partner,” 9.4, cf. 6.14), both used to describe wisdom, or (“nameless,” 14.27) and (“lifeless,” 13.17; 14.29), both used in the description of idols, or (“wearing a crown,” 4.2), used of the virtuous but childless believer. The use of Hellenistic philosophical vocabulary within the WisSal is illustrated by some of the terms applied to wisdom in 7.22–24, such as (“unhindered”) and (“beneficient”), or by the words that describe Salomon’s relationship with wisdom, (“bride,” 8.2) and (“enamored,” 8.2), which are not used in a metaphorical sense in the Septuagint. Examples of Hellenistic ethical vocabulary are to be found in the terms used for virtues and vices in WisSal, such as (“longsuffering, forbearance,” 2.19) or (“perjury,” 14.25, one of a whole list of vices in 14.25–26), and examples of psychological vocabulary are to be found in the terms used to describe the fear that gripped the lawless Egyptians (17.3–19), such as 7 (“apparitions,” 17.3) or (“terrors,” 17.8), or in such terms as (“stern, severe,” 5.20; 6.5; 11.10; 12.9; 18.15).

Finally it may be observed that the author quotes from the Septuagint in a number of places (cf. e.g., 2.12 and Esa 3.10; 11.22 and Esa 40.15; 16.22 and Ex 9.24).

T HE NETS T RANSLATION OF THE W ISDOM OF S ALOMON

The translation for NETS of a book composed in Greek is manifestly a different kind of enterprise from the translation of a book composed in Hebrew and translated into Greek. The NRSV already provides a translation of the Greek text of WisSal and is based on a Greek text that differs to only a limited extent from the one used for the present translation. That there should, nonetheless, be a need for a NETS translation of WisSal different from that of the NRSV derives from the different aims of the two translations and from the different needs of the audiences at which they are directed. Thus whereas the NRSV “is intended for use in public reading and congregational worship, as well as in private study, instruction, and meditation,” 8 NETS “is aimed primarily at . . . a biblically well-educated audience” 9 and is intended in the first instance as an aid to scholarly study. With this in mind, I have tried to keep to the following principles for the translation of WisSal for NETS: (1) the general principle “as literal as possible, as free as necessary;” (2) consistency in English translation equivalents so far as is compatible with the meaning of the sentence being translated; (3) in the light of these two principles, the NRSV as the default translation. In addition, my aim has been to provide as clear a translation as possible and to err on the side of literalness, rather than to try to reproduce in English the rhetorical character of the Greek.

With regard to details, I have used gender-inclusive language except in passages where the cultural context seemed to require otherwise (e.g., 14.1, 8). In most such passages, the NRSV gives a similar translation but not in the case of the passage concerning the potter (15.7–13). I have usually translated by “human being” or “mortal,” occasionally by other words, and have only translated it by “man” in the one passage (9.5) where the context required it.

E DITORIAL D ETAIL

The chapter and verse divisions follow those given by Ziegler in the Göttingen edition of WisSal and correspond almost without exception to those given in the NRSV. But in one or two cases (e.g., 4.14–15) there are minor differences from the NRSV affecting the verse division.

The division of the text into paragraphs also follows Ziegler’s edition of WisSal, but differs in some respects from the arrangement of the text in the NRSV. However, I have not felt it necessary in all cases to follow Ziegler’s punctuation of the Greek text.

B IBLIOGRAPHICAL N OTE

In addition to the NRSV and to standard grammars, lexica and concordances, I have consulted the translations by David Winston ( The Wisdom of Solomon [AB 43; Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1979]) and by S. Holmes (“The Wisdom of Solomon,” in Charles I.518–568). I have also found it helpful on occasions to consult the Revised Version (the revision of the Apocrypha appeared in 1895) and the German translation by Johannes Fichtner ( Weisheit Salomos [Handbuch zum Alten Testament: II.6; Tübingen J. C. B. Mohr Paul Siebeck , 1938]), which includes some brief notes on the Greek text.
